
The Gods of the Trojan War
Old Dominion University Model United Nations Society
Introduction
In Greek mythology, the Trojan War was waged
against the city of Troy by the Achaeans
(Greeks) after Paris of Troy took Helen from her
husband Menelaus, king of Sparta.
The war is one of the most important events in
Greek mythology, narrated through many works
of Greek literature, most notably Homer's Iliad.
The core of the Iliad (Books II – XXIII)
describes a period of four days and two nights in
the tenth year of the decade-long siege of Troy;
the Odyssey describes the journey home of
Odysseus, one of the war's heroes.
Other parts of the war are described in a cycle of
epic poems, which have survived through
fragments. Episodes from the war provided
material for Greek tragedy and other works of
Greek literature, and for Roman poets including
Virgil and Ovid.1
1
‘Trojan War’, Wikipedia, n.d.,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trojan_War
The Gods of the Trojan War
2
Origins of the legend of the
Trojan War
The ancient Greeks believed that Troy was
located near the Dardanelles and that the Trojan
War was a historical event of the 13th or 12th
century BC, but by the mid-19th century AD,
both the war and the city were widely seen as
non-historical. In 1868, however, the German
archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann met Frank
Calvert, who convinced Schliemann that Troy
was at what is now Hisarlik in Turkey. On the
basis of excavations conducted by Schliemann
and others, this claim is now accepted by most
scholars.
Whether there is any historical reality behind the
Trojan War remains an open question. Many
scholars believe that there is a historical core to
the tale, though this may simply mean that the
Homeric stories are a fusion of various tales of
sieges and expeditions by Mycenaean Greeks
during the Bronze Age. Those who believe that
the stories of the Trojan War are derived from a
specific historical conflict usually date it to the
12th or 11th century BC, often preferring the
dates given by Eratosthenes, 1194–1184 BC,
which roughly correspond to archaeological
evidence of a catastrophic burning of Troy VII,
and the Late Bronze Age collapse.
The Classical legends of the Trojan War
developed continuously throughout Greek and
Latin literature. In Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey,
the earliest literary evidence available, the chief
stories have already taken shape, and individual
themes were elaborated later, especially in
Greek drama. The story of the Trojan origin,
through Aeneas, of Rome helped to inspire
Roman interest; Book II of Virgil’s Aeneid
contains the best-known account of the sack of
Troy.
The war
The Trojan War fought between the Greeks and
Troy originated in the following manner. King
Priam of Troy was wealthy and powerful; by his
wife Hecuba and by concubines he had 50 sons
and 12 daughters. But his son Paris was invited
to judge which of the goddesses Aphrodite,
Hera, and Athena was entitled to receive the
golden apple marked by the goddess Eris
(Discord) “for the most beautiful.” Aphrodite
promised Paris the most beautiful woman in the
world: he therefore awarded her the apple and
went to Greece, where he won the love of, and
eloped with, Helen, wife of Menelaus, the king
of Sparta.
Menelaus captures Helen in Troy, Ajax the Lesser drags
Cassandra from Palladium before eyes of Priam, fresco
from the Casa del Menandro, Pompeii
To recover Helen, the Greeks launched a great
expedition under the command of Menelaus’s
brother, Agamemnon, king of Árgos or
Mycenae. The Trojans refused to return Helen.
Small towns in or near the Troad were sacked by
the Greeks, but Troy, assisted by allies from
Asia Minor and Thrace, withstood a Greek siege
for 10 years.
The Gods of the Trojan War
3
The gods also took sides, notably Hera, Athena,
and Poseidon for the Greeks, and Aphrodite
(who had a son, Aeneas, by the Trojan Anchises,
grandson of Assaracus), Apollo, and Ares for the
Trojans. The Iliad, which is set in the 10th year
of the war, tells of the quarrel between
Agamemnon and Achilles, who was the finest
Greek warrior, and the consequent deaths in
battle of (among others) Achilles’ friend
Patroclus and Priam’s eldest son, Hector.
After Hector’s death the Trojans were joined by
two exotic allies, Penthesilea, queen of the
Amazons, and Memnon, king of the Ethiopians
and son of the dawn-goddess Eos. Achilles
killed both of these, but Paris then managed to
kill Achilles with an arrow. Before they could
take Troy, the Greeks had to steal from the
citadel the wooden image of Pallas Athena (the
Palladium) and fetch the arrows of Heracles and
the sick archer Philoctetes from Lemnos and
Achilles’ son Neoptolemus (Pyrrhus) from
Skyros; Odysseus and Diomedes achieved all
these. Finally, with Athena’s help, Epeius built a
huge wooden horse. Several Greek warriors hid
inside it; the rest of the Greek army sailed away
to Tenedos, a nearby island, pretending to
abandon the siege. Despite the warnings of
Priam’s daughter Cassandra, the Trojans were
persuaded by Sinon, a Greek who feigned
desertion, to take the horse inside the walls of
Troy as an offering to Athena; the priest
Laocoön, who tried to have the horse destroyed,
was killed by sea-serpents. At night the Greek
fleet returned, and the Greeks from the horse
opened the gates of Troy. In the total sack that
followed, Priam and his remaining sons were
slaughtered; the Trojan women passed into
slavery in various cities of Greece. The
adventurous homeward voyages of the Greek
leaders were told in two epics, the Returns
(Nostoi; lost) and Homer’s Odyssey.
2
‘Summary and Analysis: Greek Mythology The Trojan
War — The Preliminaries, The Course of the War, The Fall
of Troy, and The Returns’, Cliff Notes, n.d.,
https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/m/mythology/summ
The earliest known depiction of the Trojan
Horse. The Mykonos vase c. 670 BC.
The few Trojan survivors included Aeneas,
whose descendants continued to rule the
Trojans; later tradition took Aeneas’s Trojans to
Italy as the ancestors of the Romans.
Summary and Analysis: Greek
Mythology The Trojan War —
The Preliminaries, The Course
of the War, The Fall of Troy,
and The Returns2
King Priam ruled in the wealthy, fortified city of
Troy. He was not only prosperous, but he had
fifty or more children, and it seemed as if good
fortune would bless him and his children for a
long time to come. However, his wife, Hecuba,
had a nightmare in which she gave birth to a
deadly firebrand. The seers interpreted this to
mean that her unborn child would destroy Troy
and its inhabitants. When the infant was born it
ary-and-analysis-greek-mythology/the-trojan-war-8212-
the-preliminaries-the-course-of-the-war-the-fall-of-troyand-the-returns
The Gods of the Trojan War
4
was exposed on Mount Ida, but a she-bear
nursed it and it survived, growing up as a
shepherd called Alexander, or Paris. Paris took
the nymph Oenone as a lover.
At the wedding of Peleus and Thetis the gods
were enjoying themselves when Eris, or Strife,
threw a golden apple into their midst with the
words, "For the fairest," attached. Hera, Athena,
and Aphrodite all claimed the apple and asked
Zeus to judge between them, but he wisely
refused, directing the three goddesses to a
shepherd on Mount Ida who could decide the
loveliest.
The goddesses approached Paris and each
offered Paris a bribe for selecting her. Hera
promised to make him a king who would rule
Asia and have great wealth. Athena offered to
give him wisdom and an invincible valor in
warfare. But Aphrodite won the apple by
promising Paris the most beautiful woman in the
world — the spectacular Helen. His choice was
imprudent to say the least, since he made
implacable enemies of Hera and Athena, both of
whom vowed to destroy him and Troy.
On learning that he would possess Helen, Paris
first went to Troy and established himself as a
true prince, the legitimate son of Priam and
Hecuba. He now had no further use for Oenone
and abandoned her. Then he sailed for Sparta,
where he seduced Helen during her husband's
absence and took her back to Troy with him.
Meanwhile Paris' sister Cassandra was faced
with trouble. Apollo gave her the gift of
prophecy while trying to make love to her, but
she had taken a vow of chastity and resisted him.
In anger Apollo turned his gift into a curse by
making it so that no one would believe her.
When Paris returned with Helen and stood
before Priam to get his father's acceptance
Cassandra came into the room, visualized all
that would occur because of Paris and his lust,
gave shrieks of despair, and railed at her
immoral brother. Thinking Cassandra mad,
Priam had his daughter locked in a palace cell.
The Gods of the Trojan War
5
When Menelaus returned to Sparta and found his
wife Helen gone, he summoned the Greek
leaders to go with him to conquer Troy and
recover Helen. These leaders were pledged to
aid Menelaus, for as they had courted Helen too
they had taken an oath to avenge any dishonor
that fell upon her future husband because of her.
Thus Paris precipitated the Trojan War, which
would fulfill the prophetic dream his mother had
of giving birth to a firebrand that would destroy
Troy.
An oracle had said that the first to leap ashore on
Trojan territory would be the first to die.
Protesilaus took this burden on himself and was
greatly honored for it after being slain in a
skirmish with Hector, the Trojan prince. A
mighty warrior, Hector was the mainstay of
Troy in the ten years of fighting that followed.
Yet Hector bore the knowledge that both he and
his city were doomed. If his brother Troilus had
lived to be twenty Troy might have been spared,
but Achilles slew the boy in his teens. Troy had
one other defender of note, Aeneas, an ally from
a neighboring land. The Greek army, however,
was full of heroes. In addition to Agamemnon,
Menelaus, Nestor, Odysseus, and Achilles, there
were Diomedes and the two Ajaxes.
The gods took part in the war as well, affecting
the outcome of various battles. Apollo, Artemis,
Ares, and Aphrodite sided with the Trojans,
while Hera, Athena, Poseidon, Hermes, and
Hephaestus aided the Greeks. Zeus might
interfere on occasion, but he maintained
neutrality for the most part, being fully aware of
what would happen.
The Gods of the Trojan War
6
After nine years of fighting the Greeks had
managed to lay waste many kingdoms allied to
Troy in Asia Minor, but they had not made
much headway against Troy itself. There was
friction in the Greek camp. Odysseus still bore a
grudge against Palamedes, the man who had
ruthlessly shown his madness to be a hoax.
When Palamedes denounced Odysseus for an
unsuccessful foraging expedition, Odysseus
framed Palamedes, making him appear a traitor.
Palamedes was stoned to death as a result.
But then a more disastrous quarrel broke out,
this time between Agamemnon and Achilles.
Agamemnon had taken the daughter of a priest
of Apollo as a trophy of war, and when her
father came to ransom her Agamemnon sent him
off without her. The priest called upon Apollo to
avenge him, so Apollo sent a plague to the
Greeks that killed many. Achilles called a
council and demanded that Agamemnon give
back the girl, Chryseis. Agamemnon angrily
agreed, but he insisted on taking Achilles' own
prize, the maid Briseis, in her place. It would
have come to murder had not Athena intervened.
Achilles then gave up Briseis, but in his
wounded pride he decided to withdraw from the
war. Since the Greek victories up to that point
had been due to Achilles' prowess, this was a
calamity for the Greeks. Achilles told his mother
Thetis to petition Zeus for Trojan victories,
which she did.
Quick to see that Achilles and his band of
Myrmidons had retired from the fighting, the
Trojans made a spirited attack. Agamemnon
then granted a truce in which it was agreed that
Paris and Menelaus should fight in single
combat for Helen. But the duel was
inconclusive, for Aphrodite, seeing that Paris
was losing, wrapped him in a magic cloud and
took him back to Troy.
Menelaus searched for Paris in the Trojan ranks,
and Agamemnon demanded that the Trojans
surrender Helen. The Trojans were willing,
which might have ended the war. But Hera
wanted Troy devastated, so she dispatched
Athena to break the truce. Athena then
persuaded the Trojan archer Pandarus to fire an
arrow at Menelaus. The shot grazed Menelaus,
and the fighting resumed in an angry turmoil.
Forced to retreat, Hector was advised to return to
Troy and bid his mother Hecuba to offer her
most beautiful robe with a plea for mercy to the
hostile Athena. Yet this gesture failed to placate
the goddess. After a poignant conversation with
his wife Andromache and dandling his infant
son Astyanax, Hector went back to the field and
issued a challenge to duel to Achilles, who
declined. Ajax took up the challenge, and in the
fight Ajax slightly bested Hector. The two
warriors parted after exchanging gifts.
Achilles and Ajax engaged in a game, c. 540–
530 BC, Vatican Museums
Honoring his promise to Thetis, who had asked
him to aid the Trojans, Zeus ordered the other
gods from the battlefield. As a consequence the
Greeks lost badly.
The next day the Greeks were forced back to the
beach, and Agamemnon, Odysseus, and
Diomedes were wounded. Hera resolved to turn
the tide of battle. Using Aphrodite's magic
girdle, she seduced Zeus into making love to her
and forgetting about the war. While Zeus was
The Gods of the Trojan War
7
engaged Poseidon entered the fray and made the
Trojans retreat. Ajax hurled a boulder at Hector
and felled him, whereupon the Trojans ran
madly for the city. Zeus recovered from his
infatuation, saw the rout, threatened to beat
Hera, and ordered Poseidon from the field.
Apollo came to Hector's aid, breathing vigor into
him. Once again the Trojans gained the upper
hand. With Hector in the forefront the Trojans
smashed down the protective barricades the
Greeks had built to protect their ships. Greatly
alarmed, Achilles' companion Patroclus tried to
persuade his friend to fight, but still Achilles
declined. Patroclus then borrowed Achilles'
armor and entered the battle. Thinking that
Achilles was now fighting, the Trojans panicked
as Patroclus slaughtered them right and left. He
made his way to the walls of Troy, but Apollo
dazed him as he tried to scale them. Hector
found Patroclus then and slew him, stripping
him of his splendid armor.
When Achilles received news of Patroclus' death
he threw himself on the ground in a frenzy of
grief and had to be restrained. His mother,
Thetis, brought him new armor fashioned by
Hephaestus, but she warned him that if he killed
Hector he himself would perish soon after.
Nevertheless, Achilles was determined to slay
Hector and a host of Trojans besides. The next
morning he made a formal reconciliation with
Agamemnon and began fighting immediately.
The clash of arms that day was terrible. While
Hector and Aeneas killed many Greeks they
could not stop Achilles in his furor of
bloodletting. In fact, both Aeneas and Hector
had to be rescued with divine help. Achilles
filled the Scamander River so full of bodies in
his dreadful onslaught that the waters overflowed and nearly drowned him. The gods, too,
engaged in battle among themselves, as Athena
felled Ares, Hera boxed Artemis' ears, and
Poseidon provoked Apollo.
Eventually Achilles encountered Hector outside
the walls of Troy. Hector ran from his opponent
in a lapse of courage, circling the city three
times. But Athena duped him into making a
stand, and Achilles' lance caught him in the
throat. Although Hector had pleaded with
Achilles to let his parents ransom his body as he
died, Achilles denied him jeeringly. Then
Achilles took Hector's corpse, tied it behind his
chariot, and dragged it back to the Greek camp
as Hector's wife watched from the walls of Troy.
Since Patroclus' ghost demanded burial, Achilles
prepared a glorious funeral. He cut the throats of
twelve Trojan nobles as a sacrifice on Patroclus'
pyre, and funeral contests in athletics followed.
For eleven days Achilles dragged Hector's body
around the pyre, yet Apollo preserved the corpse
from corruption. Then Zeus directed Thetis to
bid Achilles accept the ransom offered by King
Priam for Hector's body. Zeus also sent Hermes
to Priam, and Hermes guided the old king with
his ransom through the Greek lines to Achilles'
camp. Achilles treated Priam with courtesy, for
Priam reminded him of his own aged father,
Peleus. Achilles took Hector's weight in gold
and gave Priam the body, which Priam took
back to Troy. During the next eleven days there
was a truce as the Trojans mourned for the dead
Hector, whom they cremated and buried.
Achilles managed to kill the Amazon Queen,
Penthesileia, in the battles that followed. And
when the Trojans brought in Ethiopian
reinforcements under Prince Memnon, things
went hard with the Greeks, for many were slain.
But when Memnon killed Achilles' friend
Antilochus, Achilles retaliated by killing
Memnon in a duel. However, Achilles' life was
drawing to a close, as he well knew. One day in
battle Paris shot at Achilles, and the arrow,
guided by Apollo, struck him in the right heel,
the only place where he was vulnerable. The
Greeks had a difficult time retrieving his corpse
from the field. Only the efforts of Ajax and
The Gods of the Trojan War
8
Odysseus saved Achilles' body from the Trojans.
The hero was given a magnificent funeral.
There arose a dispute as to whether Ajax or
Odysseus should receive Achilles' resplendent
armor. The Greek commanders voted on it and
awarded the armor to Odysseus. Dishonored and
furious, Ajax resolved to kill a number of Greek
leaders, including Odysseus. But Athena visited
him with madness, and that night Ajax
butchered a number of cattle under the delusion
that they were the men who had slighted him.
When Athena removed his frenzy Ajax saw his
irremediable folly and committed suicide out of
shame.
Thetis gives her son Achilles weapons forged by
Hephaestus (detail of Attic black-figure, 575–
550 BC, Louvre, Paris)
With their two most valiant warriors dead the
Greeks became anxious about ever taking Troy.
Force of arms had been unsuccessful, so they
turned to oracles increasingly.
The death of Paris and possession of Heracles'
weapons did not change the stalemate, so
Calchas told the Greeks that only Helenus, the
Trojan seer and prince, knew how Troy's
downfall might be brought about. Odysseus
captured Helenus on Mount Ida. Helenus bore a
personal grudge against Troy, having fought for
Helen after Paris died and having lost her, and
he was willing to betray the city. First, the
Greeks had to bring Pelops' bones back to Asia
from Greece. Agamemnon accomplished this.
Second, they had to bring Achilles' son
Neoptolemus into the war, and a group of
Greeks went to Scyros to get him. Third, the
Greeks had to steal the Palladium, a sacred
image of Athena, from the goddess's temple in
Troy. Diomedes and Odysseus undertook the
dangerous mission. Once in Troy Odysseus was
recognized by Helen, who saw through his
disguise but did not give him away. The two
heroes seized the sacred image of Athena and
escaped unharmed.
If Odysseus claimed credit for the notion of the
huge wooden horse, Athena had given the idea
to another. Nevertheless, Odysseus helped the
plan succeed. A great horse of wood was
constructed under Greek supervision, one with a
hollow belly to hold several soldiers. One night
this horse was brought to the Trojan plain and
warriors climbed in under Odysseus' direction.
The rest of the Greeks burned their camps and
sailed off to wait behind the nearby island of
Tenedos.
The next morning the Trojans found the Greeks
gone and the huge, mysterious horse sitting
before Troy. They also discovered a Greek
named Sinon, whom they took captive.
Odysseus had primed Sinon with plausible
stories about the Greek departure, the wooden
horse, and his own presence there. Sinon told
Priam and the others that Athena had deserted
the Greeks because of the theft of the Palladium.
Without her help they were lost and had best
depart. The Trojans needed no further proof:
they drew the gigantic horse inside their city
gates to honor Athena.
That night the soldiers crept from the horse,
killed the sentries, and opened the gates to let
the Greek army in. The Greeks set fires
throughout the city, began massacring the
inhabitants, and looted. The Trojan resistance
was ineffectual. King Priam was killed by
Neoptolemus. And by morning all but a few
Trojans were dead. Of Trojan males only
The Gods of the Trojan War
9
Aeneas, with his father and son, had escaped the
slaughter. Hector's young son Astyanax was
thrown from the walls of the city. The women
who were left went into concubinage as spoils of
war. And the princess Polyxena, whom Achilles
had loved, was sacrificed brutally upon the tomb
of the dead hero. Troy was devastated. Hera and
Athena had their revenge upon Paris and his
city.
Having accomplished their aim in sacking Troy,
the Greeks now had to face the problem of
getting back to their various kingdoms. This was
a problem, for the gods had scores to settle with
many Greeks. Soon after the Greeks set sail a
fierce storm arose that blew much of the Greek
fleet far off course.
Of those who went by ship Agamemnon was
one of the few that escaped the storm and
reached home easily. But immediately upon his
return Agamemnon's wife, Clytemnestra, and
her lover, Aegisthus, slew him and his followers,
including Cassandra, at the banquet table.
Clytemnestra had never forgiven her husband
for sacrificing Iphigenia.
Menelaus had resolved to kill Helen when he
found her in Troy, but on seeing her naked he
lost his determination and took her again as his
wife. After offending Athena, Menelaus and
Helen were caught in the storm, lost most of
their ships, and were blown to Crete and Egypt.
Unable to return to Sparta because of adverse
winds, Menelaus began trading. Eight years later
he wrested the secret of getting home from the
prophetic sea god Proteus, master of changes.
And having propitiated Athena, Menelaus was
able to sail to Sparta with Helen, returning a rich
man. When the two of them died they went to
the Isles of the Blessed, being favored relations
of Zeus.
The lesser Ajax, who had raped Cassandra in the
temple of Athena while plundering Troy, was
shipwrecked on his way home. Scrambling onto
the rocks, he rejoiced at having escaped the
vengeance of the gods. But Poseidon split the
rock to which he clung and drowned him.
Athena then exacted an annual tribute of two
maidens from Ajax's fellow Locrians to be sent
to Troy.
Bitterly resentful of the Greeks, Nauplius caused
many of their ships to smash on the Euboean
coast by lighting a deceptive beacon.
Philoctetes, who still nursed a grudge against the
Greeks for their shabby treatment of him, did not
return to Greece but sailed to Italy, where he
founded two cities.
Of all the Greeks only the wise Nestor sailed
swiftly home and enjoyed the fruits of old age in
peace, surrounded by stalwart sons. His virtues
of prudence and piety had enabled him to live to
see three generations of heroes.
Roles of the Gods
• Aphrodite favored the Trojans, defended
Paris.
• Apollo favored the Trojans, plagued the
Greek camp.
• Ares favored the Trojans, emboldened
Trojan warriors on the battlefield.
• Artemis favored the Trojans, emboldened
Trojan warriors on the battlefield.
• Scamander, the river god who was insulted
by Achilles, and tried to kill the hero for
throwing dead bodies in his river.
• Athena favored the Greeks, provided aid
on the battlefield.
• Hephaestus favored the Greeks., and
mostly forged various weapons and armor
for Greek heroes, Achilles in particular.
• Hera favored the Greeks, provided aid on
the battlefield.
• Hermes favored the Greeks, provided aid
on the battlefield.
The Gods of the Trojan War
10
• Poseidon favored the Greeks, provided aid
on the battlefield.
• Zeus uncommitted until informed by the
Fates that Troy would fall. When he learned
this, he forbade the gods from taking part in
delaying that fate.
• Demeter, uncommitted.
• Hades, uncommitted.
• Persephone, uncommitted.
The Gods described
Aphrodite favored the Trojans, defended Paris.
Aphrodite is an ancient Greek goddess
associated with love, lust, beauty, pleasure,
passion, and procreation. She was syncretized
with the Roman goddess Venus. Aphrodite's
major symbols include myrtles, roses, doves,
sparrows, and swans.
In Homer's Iliad she is the daughter of Zeus and
Dione. Aphrodite had many other epithets, each
emphasizing a different aspect of the same
goddess, or used by a different local cult. Thus
she was also known as Cytherea (Lady of
Cythera) and Cypris (Lady of Cyprus), because
both locations claimed to be the place of her
birth.
Aphrodite was married to Hephaestus, god of
fire, blacksmiths and metalworking. Aphrodite
was frequently unfaithful to him and had many
lovers; in the Odyssey, she is caught in the act of
adultery with Ares, the god of war. Aphrodite
was also the surrogate mother and lover of the
mortal shepherd Adonis, who was killed by a
wild boar. Along with Athena and Hera,
Aphrodite was one of the three goddesses whose
feud resulted in the beginning of the Trojan War
and she plays a major role throughout the Iliad.
Aphrodite has been featured in Western art as a
symbol of female beauty and has appeared in
numerous works of Western literature.
Apollo favored the Trojans, plagued the Greek
camp.
The Gods of the Trojan War
11
Apollo was recognized as a god of archery,
music and dance, truth and prophecy, healing
and diseases, the Sun and light, poetry, and
more. One of the most important and complex of
the Greek gods, he is the son of Zeus and Leto,
and the twin brother of Artemis, goddess of the
hunt. Seen as the most beautiful god and the
ideal of the kouros (ephebe, or a beardless,
athletic youth), Apollo is considered to be the
most Greek of all the gods.
As the patron deity of Delphi, Apollo is an
oracular god—the prophetic deity of the Delphic
Oracle. Apollo is the god who affords help and
wards off evil; various epithets call him the
"averter of evil". Medicine and healing are
associated with Apollo, whether through the god
himself or mediated through his son Asclepius.
Apollo delivered people from epidemics, yet he
is also a god who could bring ill-health and
deadly plague with his arrows.
The invention of archery itself is credited to
Apollo and his sister Artemis. Apollo is usually
described as carrying a silver or golden bow and
a quiver of silver or golden arrows. Apollo's
capacity to make youths grow is one of the best
attested facets of his panhellenic cult persona.
Apollo is an important pastoral deity, and was
the patron of herdsmen and shepherds.
Protection of herds, flocks and crops from
diseases, pests and predators were his primary
duties. On the other hand, Apollo also
encouraged founding new towns and
establishment of civil constitution. He is
associated with dominion over colonists. He was
the giver of laws, and his oracles were consulted
before setting laws in a city.
As the god of music, Apollo presides over all
music, songs, dance and poetry. He is the
inventor of string-music. The lyre is a common
attribute of Apollo.
Ares favored the Trojans, emboldened Trojan
warriors on the battlefield.
Ares is the Greek god of war and courage. He is
one of the Twelve Olympians, and the son of
Zeus and Hera. The Greeks were ambivalent
towards him. He embodies the physical valor
necessary for success in war but can also
personify sheer brutality and bloodlust, in
contrast to his sister, the armored Athena, whose
martial functions include military strategy and
generalship. An association with Ares endows
places, objects, and other deities with a savage,
dangerous, or militarized quality.
In the Trojan War, Aphrodite, protector of Troy,
persuades Ares to take the Trojan's side. The
Trojans lose, while Ares' sister Athena helps the
Greeks to victory. Most famously, when the
craftsman-god Hephaestus discovers his wife
Aphrodite is having an affair with Ares, he traps
the lovers in a net and exposes them to the
ridicule of the other gods.
The Gods of the Trojan War
12
Ares' nearest counterpart in Roman religion is
Mars, who was given a more important and
dignified place in ancient Roman religion as
ancestral protector of the Roman people and
state. During the Hellenization of Latin
literature, the myths of Ares were reinterpreted
by Roman writers under the name of Mars, and
in later Western art and literature, the mythology
of the two figures became virtually
indistinguishable.
Artemis favored the Trojans, emboldened
Trojan warriors on the battlefield.
Artemis is the goddess of the hunt, the
wilderness, wild animals, nature, vegetation,
childbirth, care of children, and chastity. She
would often roam the forests of Greece, attended
by her large entourage, mostly made up of
nymphs, some mortals, and hunters. The
goddess Diana is her Roman equivalent.
In Greek tradition, Artemis is the daughter of the
sky god and king of gods Zeus and Leto, and the
twin sister of Apollo. In most accounts, the
twins are the products of an extramarital liaison.
For this, Zeus' wife Hera forbade Leto from
giving birth anywhere on land. Only the island
of Delos gave refuge to Leto, allowing her to
give birth to her children. Usually, Artemis is
the twin to be born first, who then proceeds to
assist Leto in the birth of the second child,
Apollo. Like her brother, she was a kourotrophic
(child-nurturing) deity, that is the patron and
protector of young children, especially young
girls, and women, and was believed to both
bring disease upon women and children and
relieve them of it. Artemis was worshipped as
one of the primary goddesses of childbirth and
midwifery along with Eileithyia and Hera. Much
like Athena and Hestia, Artemis preferred to
remain a maiden goddess and was sworn never
to marry, and was thus one of the three Greek
virgin goddesses, over whom the goddess of
love and lust, Aphrodite, had no power
whatsoever.
In myth and literature, Artemis is presented as a
hunting goddess of the woods, surrounded by
her followers, who is not to be crossed.
In the Epic tradition, Artemis halted the winds
blowing the Greek ships during the Trojan War,
stranding the Greek fleet in Aulis, after King
Agamemnon, the leader of the expedition, shot
and killed her sacred deer. Artemis demanded
the sacrifice of Iphigenia, Agamemnon's young
daughter, as compensation for her slain deer. In
most versions, when Iphigenia is led to the altar
to be offered as a sacrifice, Artemis pities her
and takes her away, leaving another deer in her
place. In the war that followed, Artemis along
with her twin brother and mother supported the
Trojans against the Greeks, and challenged Hera
into battle.
Artemis was one of the most widely venerated
of the Ancient Greek deities, her worship spread
The Gods of the Trojan War
13
throughout ancient Greece, with her multiple
temples, altars, shrines, and local veneration
found everywhere in the ancient world. Her
great temple at Ephesus was one of the Seven
Wonders of the Ancient World, before it was
burnt to the ground. Artemis' symbols included a
bow and arrow, a quiver, and hunting knives,
and the deer and the cypress were sacred to her.
Scamander, the river god, got involved through
direct response or for personal gain, rather than
allegiance or belief in one of the two sides.
Insulted by Achilles, he tried to kill the hero for
throwing so many dead bodies in his river.
Scamander fought on the side of the Trojans
during the Trojan War (Iliad XX, 73/74; XXI),
after the Greek hero Achilles insulted him.
Scamander was also said to have attempted to
kill Achilles three times, and the hero was only
saved due to the intervention of Hera, Athena
and Hephaestus. In this context, he is the
personification of the Scamander River that
flowed from Mount Ida across the plain beneath
the city of Troy, joining the Hellespont north of
the city. The Achaeans, according to Homer, had
set up their camp near its mouth, and their
battles with the Trojans were fought on the plain
of Scamander.
According to Homer, he was called Xanthos by
gods and Scamander by men, which might
indicate that the former name refers to the god
and the latter one to the river itself.
Athena favored the Greeks, provided aid on the
battlefield,
Athena is an ancient Greek goddess associated
with wisdom, warfare, and handicraft. Athena
was regarded as the patron and protectress of
various cities across Greece, particularly the city
of Athens, from which she most likely received
The Gods of the Trojan War
14
her name. The Parthenon on the Acropolis of
Athens is dedicated to her. Her major symbols
include owls, olive trees, snakes, and the
Gorgoneion. In art, she is generally depicted
wearing a helmet and holding a spear.
In Greek mythology, Athena was believed to
have been born from the forehead of her father
Zeus. Athena was the patron goddess of heroic
endeavor; she was believed to have aided the
heroes Perseus, Heracles, Bellerophon, and
Jason. Along with Aphrodite and Hera, Athena
was one of the three goddesses whose feud
resulted in the beginning of the Trojan War.
She plays an active role in the Iliad, in which she
assists the Achaeans and, in the Odyssey, she is
the divine counselor to Odysseus.
Demeter, uncommitted.
Demeter is the Olympian goddess of the harvest
and agriculture, presiding over crops, grains,
food, and the fertility of the earth. Although she
is mostly known as a grain goddess, she also
appeared as a goddess of health, birth, and
marriage, and had connections to the
Underworld.
In Greek tradition, Demeter is the second child
of the Titans Rhea and Cronus, and sister to
Hestia, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus. Like
her other siblings but Zeus, she was swallowed
by her father as an infant and rescued by Zeus.
Through her brother Zeus, she became the
mother of Persephone, a fertility goddess.
One of the most notable Homeric Hymns, the
Homeric Hymn to Demeter, tells the story of
Persephone's abduction by Hades and Demeter's
search for her. When Hades, the King of the
Underworld, wished to make Persephone his
wife, he abducted her from a field while she was
picking flowers, with Zeus' leave. Demeter
searched everywhere to find her missing
daughter to no avail until she was informed that
Hades had taken her to the Underworld. In
response, Demeter neglected her duties as
goddess of agriculture, plunging the earth into a
deadly famine where nothing would grow,
causing mortals to die. Zeus ordered Hades to
return Persephone to her mother to avert the
disaster. However, because Persephone had
eaten food from the Underworld, she could not
stay with Demeter forever but had to divide the
year between her mother and her husband,
explaining the seasonal cycle, as Demeter does
not let plants grow while Persephone is gone.
Though Demeter is often described simply as the
goddess of the harvest, she presided also over
the sacred law, and the cycle of life and death.
She and her daughter Persephone were the
central figures of the Eleusinian Mysteries, a
religious tradition that predated the Olympian
pantheon and which may have its roots in the
Mycenaean period c. 1400–1200 BC.
The Gods of the Trojan War
15
Hephaestus favored the Greeks, provided aid on
the battlefield. He mostly forged various
weapons and armor for Greek heroes, Achilles
in particular.
Hephaestus is the Greek god of blacksmiths,
metalworking, carpenters, craftsmen, artisans,
sculptors, metallurgy, fire (compare, however,
with Hestia), and volcanoes. Hephaestus's
Roman counterpart is Vulcan. In Greek
mythology, Hephaestus was either the son of
Zeus and Hera or he was Hera's parthenogenous
child. He was cast off Mount Olympus by his
mother Hera because of his lameness, the result
of a congenital impairment; or in another
account, by Zeus for protecting Hera from his
advances.
As a smithing god, Hephaestus made all the
weapons of the gods in Olympus. He served as
the blacksmith of the gods, and was worshipped
in the manufacturing and industrial centers of
Greece, particularly Athens. The cult of
Hephaestus was based in Lemnos. Hephaestus's
symbols are a smith's hammer, anvil, and a pair
of tongs.
Hades: uncommitted.
Hades is the god of the dead and the king of the
underworld, with which his name became
synonymous. Hades was the eldest son of
Cronus and Rhea, although this also made him
the last son to be regurgitated by his father. He
and his brothers, Zeus and Poseidon, defeated
their father's generation of gods, the Titans, and
claimed rulership over the cosmos. Hades
received the underworld, Zeus the sky, and
Poseidon the sea, with the solid earth, long the
province of Gaia, available to all three
concurrently. In artistic depictions, Hades is
typically portrayed holding a bident and wearing
his helm with Cerberus, the three-headed guard
dog of the underworld, standing to his side.
The Gods of the Trojan War
16
Hera favored the Greeks, provided aid on the
battlefield.
In ancient Greek religion, Hera is the goddess of
marriage, women and family, and the protector
of women during childbirth. In Greek
mythology, she is queen of the twelve
Olympians and Mount Olympus, sister and wife
of Zeus, and daughter of the Titans Cronus and
Rhea. One of her defining characteristics in
myth is her jealous and vengeful nature in
dealing with any who offend her, especially
Zeus' numerous adulterous lovers and
illegitimate offspring.
Her iconography usually presents her as a
dignified, matronly figure, upright or enthroned,
crowned with a polos or diadem, sometimes
veiled as a married woman. She is the patron
goddess of lawful marriage. She presides over
weddings, blesses and legalizes marital unions,
and protects women from harm during
childbirth. Her sacred animals include the cow,
cuckoo and the peacock. She is sometimes
shown holding a pomegranate, as an emblem of
immortality. Her Roman counterpart is Juno.
Persephone, uncommitted.
Persephone, also called Kore or Cora, is the
daughter of Zeus and Demeter. She became the
queen of the underworld after her abduction by
and marriage to her uncle Hades, the king of the
underworld.
The myth of her abduction, her sojourn in the
underworld, and her temporary return to the
surface represents her functions as the
embodiment of spring and the personification of
vegetation, especially grain crops, which
disappear into the earth when sown, sprout from
the earth in spring, and are harvested when fully
grown. In Classical Greek art, Persephone is
invariably portrayed robed, often carrying a
sheaf of grain. She may appear as a mystical
divinity with a scepter and a little box, but she
was mostly represented in the process of being
carried off by Hades.
The Gods of the Trojan War
17
Persephone as a vegetation goddess and her
mother Demeter were the central figures of the
Eleusinian Mysteries, which promised the
initiated a happy afterlife. The origins of her cult
are uncertain, but it was based on ancient
agrarian cults of agricultural communities. In
Athens, the mysteries celebrated in the month of
Anthesterion were dedicated to her.
Poseidon favored the Greeks, provided aid on
the battlefield.
Poseidon was one of the Twelve Olympians in
ancient Greek religion and myth, god of the sea,
storms, earthquakes and horses. In pre-Olympian
Bronze Age Greece, he was venerated as a chief
deity at Pylos and Thebes. He also had the cult
title "earth shaker". He is often regarded as the
tamer or father of horses, and with a strike of his
trident, he created springs which are related to
the word horse. His Roman equivalent is
Neptune.
Poseidon was the protector of seafarers, and of
many Hellenic cities and colonies. Homer and
Hesiod suggest that Poseidon became lord of the
sea when, following the overthrow of his father
Cronus, the world was divided by lot among
Cronus' three sons; Zeus was given the sky,
Hades the underworld, and Poseidon the sea,
with the Earth and Mount Olympus belonging to
all three. In Homer's Iliad, Poseidon supports the
Greeks against the Trojans during the Trojan
War and in the Odyssey, during the sea-voyage
from Troy back home to Ithaca,
Zeus remained uncommitted until informed by
the Fates that Troy would fall. When he learned
this, he forbade the gods from taking part in
delaying that fate.
Zeus is the sky and thunder god in ancient Greek
religion, who rules as king of the gods on Mount
Olympus. His name is cognate with the first
element of his Roman equivalent Jupiter.
In most traditions, he is married to Hera, by
whom he is usually said to have fathered Ares,
Eileithyia, Hebe, and Hephaestus.
The Gods of the Trojan War
18
At the oracle of Dodona, his consort was said to
be Dione, by whom the Iliad states that he
fathered Aphrodite. Zeus' first wife was Metis,
by whom he had Athena. Zeus was also
infamous for his erotic escapades. These resulted
in many divine and heroic offspring, including
Apollo, Artemis, Hermes, Persephone,
Dionysus, Perseus, Heracles, Helen of Troy,
Minos, and the Muses.
He was respected as an all-father who was chief
of the gods, and assigned roles to the others.
Even the gods who are not his natural children
address him as Father, and all the gods rise in his
presence.
